---
id: 522
title: Even when the world is burning around you
date: 2019-08-18T18:49:05+00:00
author: Stella
layout: post
guid: http://stellaktran.com/blog/?p=522
permalink: /burning/
categories:
  - Shelf Help
---
[Toni Morrison passed away last week](https://www.nytimes.com/2019/08/06/books/toni-morrison-death.html?module=inline). With the Administration’s hateful rhetoric, and three mass shootings in the span of a week and a half,&nbsp; [I found hope in re-visiting her 1993 Nobel Prize speech](https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/literature/1993/morrison/lecture/?_ga=2.225538394.1593246199.1565612767-1841843972.1565612767).  
  
She begins her speech with a story about a wise, blind woman, who is asked by a group of children if a bird that they are holding in their hands is dead or alive. Dead or alive &#8212;&nbsp; the blind woman thinks this is a trick, a cruelty, the fate of this poor creature in the hands of the children. As a part of this story, Morrison uses the bird to illustrate her fear of how language can enable oppression and violence, which feels so timely in our political climate: _“The systematic looting of language can be recognized by the tendency of its users to forgo its nuanced, complex, mid-wifery properties for menace and subjugation. Oppressive language does more than represent violence; it is violence; does more than represent the limits of knowledge; it limits knowledge. Whether it is obscuring state language or the faux-language of mindless media; whether it is the proud but calcified language of the academy or the commodity driven language of science; whether it is the malign language of law-without-ethics, or language designed for the estrangement of minorities, hiding its racist plunder in its literary cheek – it must be rejected, altered and exposed.”  
_ 

But alas! The children are ultimately not cruel. They wish to tap into the women&#8217;s wisdom and experience to understand life &#8212; all of it &#8212; and death. I love that Morrison uses the vulnerability of language to build up our own sense of vulnerability for the bird and the power of the children. I can viscerally feel the cruelty, or the anticipation of it, from the children. I imagine the myriad times when I, as I get older, with all my rhyme or reason, look into the eyes of children and feel sheer terror for not knowing what&#8217;s behind them. 

And then Morrison quickly reverses our expectations of how the story should go. 

Reading this was a reminder of how vulnerability and fear can make it easy to build up walls and false narratives, and I need to fight the desire to judge and close down. Especially during times like this, and even when the world can be so, so ugly. And it was a reminder to have faith that we will have a path toward shared prosperity if we approach these difficult moments without judgement and with openness.  
  
_“Finally”, she says, “I trust you now. I trust you with the bird that is not in your hands because you have truly caught it. Look. How lovely it is, this thing we have done – together.”_